---
layout: post
title: Introduction to Mathematical Economics Week 1
category: Econometrics
keywords: ITME, week1
---
### Lecture 1
#### Specification of technology
Production plan

Production possibilities set

Short-fun production possibilties set

Input requirement set, one output

Isoquant, one output

Production function, one output

Transformation function

#### Properties of technologies

Monotonicity of V(y)

Monotonicity of production set Y

Convexity of V(y)

Proposition 1: Y convex => V(y) convex for all possible y

Proposition 2: V(y) convex for all possible y <=> production function x -> f(x) is quasiconcave

Regularity of V(y)

#### Technical rate of substitution (TRS)
#### Elasticity of substitution
#### Logarithmic derivative
#### Returns to scale
constant returns to scale 

- $$y\in Y => ty \in Y$$ for all $$t\geq 0$$
- $$x\in V(y) => tx \in V(ty)$$ for all $$t\geq 0$$
- f(tx)=tf(x) for all $t\geq 0$, i.e. the production function f is homogeneous of degree 1.

increasing returns to scale if f(tx) > tf(x) for all t>1.

decreasing returns to scale if f(tx) < tf(x) for all t>1. 

global measure

local measure e(x)

#### Homogeneous and homothetic production functions

Homogeneous functions

Homothetic functions

Lemma: if the production function f is linear homogeneous, then TRS is independent of the scale of productions. Proof

#### Constant elasticity of substitution


### Tutorial: 
#### Extra 1.1 (except part c)
A firm’s production technology is characterized by the following production function: 
F(l,k)=lk
where ` is hours of labour and k is units of capital. Denote the hourly
wage by w and the cost of using one unit of capital by r. The firm’s
output is denoted by y.
a) Does the firm’s technology exhibit decreasing, constant, or increasing returns to scale?

**Sol:**



b) Calculate the elasticity of substitution for the production function.
**Sol:**



#### Extra 2.1
A firm uses one input (the x-good) to produce its output (the y-good).
The price of the input is w and the price of the output is p. We have
two observations regarding the firm’s behaviour:
(p1, w1, y1, x1) = (2, 5, 3, 1), (p2, w2, y2, x2) = (3, 5, 5, 2).
Show that these two observations satisfy the Weak Axiom of Profit
Maximization. Then give a third observation (p3, w3, y3, x3) such that
when added to the first two observations the firm’s behaviour does not
satisfy the Weak Axiom of Profit Maximization. Explain your answer.
**Sol:**



#### Varian 1.5
What is the elasticity of scale of the CES technology, $$f(x_1, x_2)=(x_1^{\rho}+x_2^{\rho})^{\frac{1}{\rho}}$$?

**Sol:**

Substitute $$tx_i$$ for i=1,2 to get
$$f(tx_1, tx_2)=[(tx_1)^{\rho}+(tx_2)^{\rho}]^{\frac{1}{\rho}}=t[x_1^{\rho}+x_2^{\rho}]^{\frac{1}{\rho}}=tf(x_1,x_2)$$
This implies that the CES(constant elasticity of scale) function exhibits constant-returns to scale and hence has an elasticity of scale of 1.


#### Varian 1.10
Let Y be a production set. The technology is additive if y in Y and y' in Y implies that y+y' is in Y. The technology is divisible if y in Y and $$0\leq t \leq 1$$ implies that ty is in Y. Show that if a technology is both additive and divisible, then Y must be convex and exhibit constant returns to scale.

**Sol:**

To prove the convexity, we must show that for all y and y' in Y and $$0\leq t \leq 1$$, we must have ty + (1-t)y' in Y. 
But divisibility implies that ty and (1-t)y' are in Y, and additivity implies that their sum is in Y.

To show constant returns to scale, we must show that if y is in Y, and s>0, we must have sy in Y. 
Given any s>0, let n be a nonnegative integer such that $$n\geq s \geq n-1$$. **By additivity ny is in Y**; since $$s/n \leq 1$$, divisibility implies (s/n)ny=sy is in Y.

#### Varian 2.7
The production function is $$f(x) = 20x - x^2$$ and the price of output is normalized to 1. Let w be the prcie of the x-input. We must have $$x\geq 0$$.
a) What is the first-order condition for profit maximization if x>0?

**Sol:**

We want to maximize $$20x - x^2 - wx$$. The first order condition is $$20-2x-w=0$$

b) For what values of w will the optiml x be zero?

**Sol:**

For the optiomal x be zero, the derivative of profit with respect to x must be nonpositibe at x=0: 20-2x-w < 0 when x = 0, or $$w\geq 20$$.

c) For what values of w will the optimal x be 10?

**Sol:**

w = 0

d) What is the factor demand function?

**Sol:**

The factor demand function is $$x=10-w/2$$ or to be more precise, $$x=max\{10-w/2, 0\}$$.

e) What is the profit function?

**Sol:**

Profits as a function of output are 
$$20x-x^2-wx$$ = [20-w-x]x.
Substitute $$x=10-w/2$$ to find
$$\pi(w)=[10-\frac{w}{2}]^2$$


f) What is the derivative of the profit function with respect to w?

**Sol:**

-(10-w/2) which is the negative of the factor demand.





